Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher, interviewee Nicola Fogarty.
We are holding the interview in the Swooker office
and today's date is the 2nd of October 2015.
Nicky, well that is your name by which we know you.
Could you spell your full name for us for the record please?
Certainly, N-I-C-O-L-A-F-O-G-A-T-Y.
Full marks, very good.
Okay.
So Cardiff Carnival, how did you first get involved?
I'm not, well, lived in Carnival, lived in Carnival,
lived in Cardiff since 1990.
Had Alice in 1996, had been to a couple of carnivals
before she was born, as you know, party, party.
And then, started going to carnival when she was little
to show her, so she was in a push chair and all wrapped up
because it was usually quite chilly.
Sounds like Cardiff in the summer, doesn't it?
Yeah, absolutely.
And we used to go and we used to try and score a nice place
by wherever the end of the carnival was happening that year
so that we could see the entirety of the parade.
Always impressed by the big things,
the big strange, wonderful things that were on the parade.
Big creations on backpacks.
On backpacks and stilts and other things.
Remember the Jumbies, Kevin and Oggy?
No, I don't remember the names, you see,
because I wasn't that involved.
You just see the thing pass by and go,
ooh, that's lovely and amazing and wonderful.
And decided when she was about four or five,
that I was gonna get involved,
but when she was a bit older,
because I thought taking a four or five year old
would be too much like hard work.
And by the time she was eight,
I thought she was capable enough
so she could go along and join in in her own right
rather than just be an appendage to her mother.
So we went in and we joined in
and we started doing the printing of Rainbow People costumes.
Lots of dots, little production line going on.
Did that for about three days.
And then the man, yeah, how many dots did you produce?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, enough of this.
Millions, millions.
Enough of this.
They were quite pretty though.
Absolutely.
It was quite nice to do.
And then didn't get actually to go on the carnival
because I broke my toe the weekend before.
That's dashed bad luck as we say.
So daddy had to join in
and daddy had to be a rainbow man.
Mick was the rainbow man.
I shall always think of him that way.
Yes, I can get the photos to prove it.
I think we're going to have to ask you
to share those with us so we can put those online
as part of the archive.
You'll love me for that one.
Absolutely.
So the first costume that you and Alice performed
was part of a rainbow section.
Well, we were part of the rainbow section.
Of course Mick was.
But Mick was, I didn't actually go in.
Did Mick have time to learn a few moves?
I mean, how did he?
I don't think he did to be honest.
He facilitated Alice's enjoyment.
And Tabitha, we always brought down Alice
or I always brought down Alice and a friend.
It was usually Tabitha and Tabitha was, you know,
a little rainbow girly.
So your foot is now healed.
I hasten to add that you didn't limp into this interview.
You weren't permanently scarred by the carnival experience.
I actually can't feel the tip of my toe
because of the break in my big toe.
Even to this day, folks.
You know.
Yeah.
Yeah, but I'm okay.
I can still walk.
It's a good sign.
So you did the rainbow section.
Take us through your story.
What happened next?
Next year,
next year was the,
it was the under the sea theme.
And we did a lot of, of,
tissueing on the big,
there was like a sea serpent.
Yeah, I remember.
In sections.
Yeah, very much so.
And Alice and I did a lot of tissue paper on it,
but we opted to be in the sea urchin.
It was one of Lizzie's lovely little drawings of sea urchins.
And we opted to be in the sea urchin drawings.
Well, the sea urchin costumes didn't get made
right until the last minute.
And we're actually a bit nervous.
But we went in them anyway.
We were very pink.
They were little pink sea urchins with puffed wool
kind of skirts.
And we had, yeah, that was, that was a kind of like,
oh no, please don't come see me in this costume.
Anyway, after that, the following year,
I think was the year of,
the theme was festivals from around the world.
Yeah, yeah.
And we came in in the open evening and we saw,
again, a Lizzie's illustration for Day of the Dead people.
Oh, excellent, the Mexican Day of the Dead, yes.
Mexican Day of the Dead.
And we went, and Alice was just sort of at 10,
kind of proto-Goth mode.
She went into Goth mode at the beginning of high school,
you know, for a couple of years, but she was kind of-
Great tradition.
Yeah, she was into skulls and other things like that.
And she just saw it and went,
yes, I want to be one of those.
And I felt, right, fine.
And by this time, I knew the staff better
and said, you know, could we have a go at building
three big skulls and-
Yes, I remember.
Having, being independent in our own little-
Yeah, and wonderfully big skeletal hands as well.
Yes, they did have, it's strange,
because we were thinking of revisiting it next year,
because it would have been her 20th birthday.
Oh, wow, her birthday.
So it would have been from 10 to 20, 10 years on to do the-
Right.
But we probably won't get the opportunity now,
because it won't be here.
Sadly, this is a strong likelihood,
is all I can say at this joke show.
I think we'll just have to make them
and walk around the streets with them for fun.
Because they were the best costumes.
I still maintain they were the best costumes to wear
that we've ever made.
Excellent.
Because they had our faces in the middle
of the big gaping mouth so that people could see,
even though we were covered in black face paint
and meant to paint.
I remember the heads themselves being really quite big.
Yeah, they were.
How big would you guess to make them were?
I suppose mine was about three foot,
maybe a little bit bigger across.
These were very big.
And maybe four foot deep.
But they were so light,
because you- Yeah, they were on backpacks
above our heads.
I mean, I can remember you dancing them,
you never seemed to stop.
And the hands, having sort of poles
with the skeletal arm and hands on to the arms,
you could actually- Last girl puppets, obviously.
Would you describe those puppets?
They felt like puppets.
Yeah, they were the first puppets, really,
that we made.
And it was the girls, particularly,
little 10-year-old girls in big skull heads
going out to the audience.
They were very interactive.
In most things that cover your face,
the public have a problem with dealing with the puppet,
because it's sort of like, where is the human being in this?
If your face is completely covered,
then people sometimes are a bit wary of it.
Yes, it's not as welcoming, is it?
No, it's not as wary.
Whereas if they could see the faces
and see the delight and glee on little girls' faces
as they were poking you with a skeletal finger
to try and frighten you, then, yeah,
they got a big reaction and they got a positive reaction
because people were acting scared
in order to get the reaction from the girls.
Can you remember, musically,
what band you were near in that parade?
I haven't a clue.
Probably Samba of some sort.
Samba of some sort, yeah.
That normally does it, it was fun.
And we had sort of ponchos and things to-
No, we definitely got images on the archive of those.
They were wonderful.
They were fun.
So you started on the puppet road.
What was your next carnival adventure after that?
Gosh.
This is, I can't remember 11.
I think 11, when she was 11, was a year we missed,
and I can't remember why.
I think it could have been a family holiday.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, mistimed.
Yeah.
But when she was 12, we did the,
they were the cat spirits.
She had, it was the first costume
that Alice had designed herself.
Right, that's something.
And because she was beginning to pester me
about what we're gonna do, what we're gonna do,
and I sat down, piece of paper, right.
Whatever you want, you draw it, we'll make it.
Oh, wow.
And so she drew the first, and I don't know why,
she's not, we did have a cat,
but she wasn't particularly fond of it.
She's never been fond of animals.
So she drew this sort of cat-like creature
with, hers had a big splash.
Yes, and had very big eyes.
Very beautiful eyes, yes.
Touch of Japanese manga comics in there.
I have no idea where they're.
Well, I think they're very beautiful.
And just for me, there was an echo
of a Japanese style cartoon called Manga.
By the eyes, definitely. Big eyes, definitely.
And she drew hers first,
and she decided it was the spirit, the water,
no, the cat spirit of water.
Right, yeah.
If, as if. Or spit, as we think of it.
As if there is such a thing.
Hello, after all, is there?
And then we sold the idea to Tabitha,
who was gonna do it with us.
Excellent. And she came up with the,
she was gonna be the night sky,
and hers went up to a point.
They were almost like onions, the shape initially.
Interesting shapes.
Yeah, Alice's went wide at the top,
and Tabitha's went up to a point
that then came over with little stars dangling from it,
and it was midnight blue with,
so Alice's was blue because it was water,
and Tabitha's was the deep dark blue
with lots of little silver bits and stars on it.
And then I decided I was going to be
the cat spirit of nature.
And mine was like a big gourd shape.
It had a twisty bit at the top,
and was green and yellow and orange with the big.
Hey, that's a sort of vegetable-like thing
going in there somewhere. Yes, yeah, it was weird.
It was weird. No, no, yeah.
They were just slightly surreal.
Yeah, yeah.
They weren't as friendly to wear
because we didn't have,
our faces were completely covered.
Yes, yeah.
And when you stare at somebody
through a giant cat head's eyes,
they kind of look at you as if you've gone off your trolley.
Yeah.
Mom, make it go away.
Yeah, what's going on here?
Not quite good.
Not as accessible as the skull heads.
The skulls, no, no.
So after the cat heads,
now we're up to, oh,
what do we do after that?
Gosh.
I know there was one that Alice,
I think that was the, no,
because if that was 10, 11, 12,
maybe it was 13, she fell off that.
I wish I could see the pictures
because Mick's got all the archive of the pictures.
Right, right, right.
And it's easier to go through,
but I can't remember exactly which one comes next.
Well, let's fast forward to the summer
because I think we've just gone
because of course, you know.
Yes.
Possibly our most ambitious and most stressful so far.
No, but on my side, you were there every day.
Every day for 17 days in a row and then some.
Yeah.
Yeah, so I mean, you know.
It's the one opportunity a year you get
to just go for it and make something huge
and out there and, you know, most of the time,
if you're making something,
you're making it on a domestic scale within your own home.
And so, you know, it can't be that big.
You wouldn't be able to live with it if it was that big.
Or get it through the door.
Yeah, it wouldn't all get it through the door.
You know, so the things you make, you know,
and I do make stuff.
I mean, usually it's jewelry or stuff like that.
It's small, itty bitty stuff.
Yeah, yeah.
And I paint as well, so I do that,
but it's not a chance to do just go for it and be creative
and not worry about having to pay for materials
and not worry about any of the, you know,
serious logistics of it.
It's sort of like Adrian's great in that he comes along
and he goes, hmm, yeah, sure, go ahead.
Is that how the conversation goes?
Usually, usually it's sort of like he'll,
when he doesn't know, he just looks at you and goes,
you'll figure it out.
And you have to, and you always do.
I mean, you always seem to triumph.
Well, I didn't get it to walk, which is...
Oh, describe it before we go any further.
It was a 14 foot high, naked woman.
Excellent.
Called Delilah Furiosa.
I haven't seen the Mad Max film,
which is Furiosa Roaned or something like that.
It's the current one, isn't it?
Yeah, Alice has seen it.
And described that she comes home from these films
and she sits and spends about an hour relating every detail
of the plot. So I don't have to go.
So yes, she was Delilah Furiosa.
She had moving joints from her neck
to her shoulders, elbows, even all her finger joints worked,
but I couldn't get them to move.
That was another frustrating thing.
They were too far up.
There was too much translation of, you know,
the string had to move too far to get it.
So you had to pull it too much.
And you know...
But you can see the steps you've made from the relative
simple mix of them.
Now there's how many joints in your creation?
Way too many.
The year, actually it could have been that year.
That could have been...
Well, anyway, I'll go back to them.
The year that Ben and Jude came to do the giant things
that were made that year.
I think from that moment on, they were,
Ben and Jude were fantastic.
They were just completely inspirational.
And so they came in and did this wonderful workshop
and just went, make giant puppets.
And I went, ooh!
Now that's a good idea.
So from that moment on, it's been how many moving bits
can I get into it?
And so, yes, we ended up with Delilah Furiosa.
Who's on a backpack and...
She wasn't on a backpack, she was on a trolley.
Oh, of course, yeah, yeah, indeed.
She was too big to be on a backpack.
Yeah, yeah.
I did contemplate having her on a backpack
because she wasn't that heavy in the end.
It was just that I would have appeared to be
as if she'd given birth to me.
There was a dilemma about finding yourself suspended
between a giant woman's legs, now you mention it.
Yeah, it just didn't seem a comfortable place to be.
I can understand that.
So we did put her on the trolley.
And mostly willows and withy sticks and paint her
and colored and then painted, varnished,
yeah.
She was mostly withy.
There was some carbon fiber pole in,
there was some bamboo in the basic structure,
but it was all covered in...
And you had some rather wonderful sayings
painted onto her.
Feminist slogans.
Yes.
Can you, Larry, for the record?
She had,
We Are Not Things written on her tummy.
She's had women hold up half the world.
She's a Chinese prophet.
And I can't remember what was on the other arm.
There was a women reclaim the night.
Yeah.
From all the reclaim the night marches.
And there was...
Which is quite a political statement, you know.
Yeah, no.
And Carnival has a point for that.
What kind of reaction did you get from the public?
From, yeah.
Interesting.
Yes.
Because a lot of women were cheering.
Excellent.
A lot of women, a lot of men kind of slightly more reserved.
There was a guy who came up to grope her bum
as he walked, as she walked past him.
Yeah.
And I just looked at him because I was on the arm.
Actually, no, I was pushing at this point.
So it was behind the arm person and in between.
And he went up to grope her bum and I said, no consent.
And he walked away.
Brilliant, brilliant.
That was a, wow.
That's a very telling, excellent.
It was interesting.
But there were people who walked up and went,
actually one of the people from the band,
I can't remember what he said he was called,
one of the bands came up and said,
I have two daughters, I'm so glad you've done this.
It really means a lot.
You know, and he was absolutely gushing.
Yeah, no, no.
And I was quite taken aback by it because it was,
you know, people don't tend to get emotional
about these things.
No, no, no.
But he was really heartfelt in that he thought
it was a fantastic thing to do.
That's amazing.
Yeah.
Oh, dear, dear.
So positive and negative.
Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
But it was, it was the first time I think
I've been out there politically.
Right, right, right.
I hadn't done anything that I...
And of course, while you're working,
Alice, your daughter is there alongside you,
but with her own visions now.
With my own.
Separate.
Yeah, with her own creation.
This year, she had, she came up with the idea ages ago,
it must have been at least six months before the carnival,
that she wanted to do an octopus
but its legs moved up.
And she came up with the idea that if she put it
on an umbrella, which had eight spikes,
then she could make this.
And the only problem being is that umbrellas
aren't made that, with that much fortitude.
And during the process of making the creature...
How many umbrellas died in the making of the show?
At least two.
Oh, really?
And each time it was a major trauma.
Oh.
And she was so near the end of her tether
because she wanted it...
It's like she can make,
she knows she can make things that are beautiful.
Yes.
But she has, was making...
She knows one end of a glue gun from another.
She does.
But she didn't, she wanted to prove
that she could have make something
that was puppet-like, like I do.
Kinetic.
Yes, kinetic sculpture.
Yes.
And that she wanted to do something that was naturalistic
in that it was like the creature
that she was attempting to create.
It wasn't just she was trying to make a pretty thing
that looked like an octopus,
but it had to move like an octopus.
And so we had several points
at which she was at the point of,
I can't do this in a bloody umbrella.
It didn't...
Blah, blah, blah.
And at one stage when I was trying to get mine to walk
and she was trying to get hers to flap its tentacles
at people, we've had a point where we've just hugged
each other and burst into tears.
And the people all around us were kind of edging slowly away.
Cardinal trauma alert,
Cardinal trauma alert.
Whoop, whoop, whoop.
It's sort of like, yeah, okay.
So it's got a bit tense and emotional.
Don't worry about it.
It goes carry on.
No, no, absolutely.
We'll sequel it in the morning.
Yes, yeah.
In fact, she had a friend with her
who made a rather extraordinary sort of,
well, yeah, I'll let you describe it.
The teacup.
This is the new one.
Why did that come from?
Well, Katrin's only been doing it since last year.
Right.
And Katrin came along last year and was,
she's quite a creative person
but hadn't done anything before.
Wanted to do her own backpack.
And so decided last year she was going to be
that Lego character, the Unikitty.
Yes.
Unikitty, well, Katrin, Kat, Kitty.
Yeah.
It's totally logical.
And so she made this fairly simple structure
but beautifully decorated and everybody loved it.
Unikitty, Unikitty all the way around.
Unikitty, Unikitty.
And so thoroughly enjoyed it.
Came back this year.
Went through several incarnations of what she wanted to be.
But decided in the end she wanted to be
an Alastin Wonderland themed teacup and saucer.
Yes, extraordinary.
Or rather the cat peering out
of an Alastin Wonderland themed teacup and saucer.
Brilliant colors.
I mean, it's a psychedelic character.
It was absolutely psychedelic.
Yeah.
And also when the structure itself was slightly asymmetrical
rather than getting het up about this,
went, oh, obviously that's the way it's meant to be
and made a very asymmetrical saucer
to go with a very asymmetrical cup
as a handle.
Yeah, I think I've added to it.
Yeah, it did, it did.
There was movement in it.
Yeah, yeah.
And so.
That's how I carry cups of tea upstairs, you know.
Yes, yeah.
So I never seem to make it in one.
And didn't want to be sort of in amongst a group.
Had enjoyed the attention.
Yeah, Unikitty, so, you know.
Yeah, I know.
The attention of, yeah.
So, but yeah.
They're a strange band.
Well, I mean, you know, you've been a wonderful
and as I say, virtually on a daily basis,
permanent feature of carnival camps for a long time.
If you had to speak to future generations
and try and sum up the atmosphere of the carnival camp,
how would you describe it?
What's going on around you as you, over time?
What sort of, what's it feel like?
What did it feel like?
It's usually the camaraderie.
This year, doing the feminist thing.
Yeah, excellent.
Wearing my hair shirt in public.
Absolutely.
Has been wonderful.
The reaction to a naked woman statue.
Yeah, the parade through the middle of Cardiff, yay!
But during the making of her, in the workshops,
you know, when I'm sculpting a bottom or breasts.
Yes, yes.
Then the reaction of, I mean, there are,
I would say predominantly women to men on most camps.
No, no, gender-wise.
Yeah, gender-wise, that's the split.
But definitely the room we were in was predominantly women.
Yeah, yeah.
And just coming over and touching and feeling
and suggesting and, you know, all the comments
and being incredibly positive from a body positive sort of.
Yes.
You know, she wasn't as...
I remember you showing me some,
is it some pre-Columbian artifacts?
Yeah, the little Venus statues.
Yes.
Because the idea arrived in my head.
She wasn't of the...
I wanted her to...
The little Venus statues are really almost spherical.
Yes.
And their breasts are so abnormally large
and their hips are so abnormally wide.
Curve upon curve upon curve.
And they don't know why they made them
because they're prehistoric.
They've obviously got no text about these figures.
And there's two suggestions,
one that they are fertility symbols
or that they were given to women during birth
to hold onto.
Interesting.
As, you know, as symbols of female strength
or female abilities.
So yeah, it came via that kind of feeling
and it was all about how...
And also there's a song by Kimia Dawson
who's an American folk singer,
really short black woman who...
Oh.
I was telling you about Kimia Dawson
who was an American folk singer.
Yeah.
Who was also part of the inspiration
for the giant woman sculpture that I made
because she wrote a song called I Like Giants,
especially female giants.
Yeah.
And it has the line in it,
all women feel too big sometimes regardless of their size.
Oh, nice.
And it's how women are put in, you know,
made to be little than made to feel small.
Absolutely.
Yeah, yeah.
And made to want to be small.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
So that was part of the influence.
And yeah, Delilah Furiosa arrived in my head,
almost fully formed with the Aboriginal hand painting
on her legs and the starry, starry...
It's beautiful art.
Really beautiful.
Starry, starry night and sunset.
Yeah.
All fully formed.
So I don't know quite where she arrived from,
but once she'd arrived in my head, she had to be made.
I say, I mean, you're one of the people
who approach carnival with a macro hat on,
you always make big statements.
And of course, two that come to mind is your...
Was the hair a Mad March hair or not?
It wasn't a Mad March hair.
It was...
It certainly wasn't a rabbit.
It wasn't a rabbit.
It was definitely a hair.
It was the year after...
You can tell by the elongated body.
Yeah, it was the year after Ben and Jude came.
And it was, I want to build a puppet,
a thing with moving bits on it and in it.
I want to be put in it, inside it as part of the creature.
And I think because of the way they worked,
I started building a skeleton first.
And I worked from the inside
and then I built the hair outside it
and skinned it with the hair.
And that, but Delilah Furiosa,
I worked the other way round.
I worked with the idea of the skeleton in mind,
but I made the...
Because...
She was all bum, belly and bust.
Yeah, she was all bum, belly and bust.
And I wanted her to be sort of in proportion
as a human figure, because the human figure,
the thing that if you look through carnivals
all over the world, the thing that gets most distorted,
if they make large figures, is the human figure.
It just doesn't work on some level,
because it's not in proportion to itself.
So I worked the other way around, which was not ideal.
But...
It's been a process of trying to learn.
Exactly, you never learn.
It's creativity.
Yes.
And yeah, and then after the hair,
the hair was lovely to be inside, actually.
It was a slightly drizzly day, so I kept dry.
And got a lovely reaction from the public.
It's legs had a realistic movement
and its paws had a realistic movement.
And so I could go and lean a paw on somebody's shoulder.
That was quite sweet.
I think your interaction with the audience
has always been one of the loveliest points.
Yeah, yeah.
And it makes for a very bespoke appearance.
Nobody else is gonna have that.
No.
You know.
Mommy, are you there?
Mommy.
And I'm stopping for lots of pictures,
which does hold other people up and they get, you know.
No, no, but...
You have to have patient people behind you.
Absolutely, but I mean, I think people actually vote
with their mobile phones now, don't they?
If they want a picture, they want a picture.
Yeah, this is true.
And you know, we've always made a point of saying,
please, you know, play with the public, you know.
And then I went to make a puppet lizard.
Yeah.
And I wanted the mouth.
I wanted to, ideally...
Wasn't a touch of chameleon about him or not?
Was a touch of chameleon about him.
Nothing, good.
Eddie lizard.
Of the chameleon future generations.
Eddie lizard, very pretty.
Eddie lizard.
He was supposed to be over an arm, but...
But I chose to clad him in latex,
and latex is really heavy.
Even in thin layers, it's quite,
made him too heavy to go one-sided.
Otherwise I'd have ended up walking around
with the puppet dragon on the floor.
He was that limpy round the carnival side, hooray.
So in the end, he went above my head
and I had to create a little pull mechanism
to make the jaws.
Beautiful, beautiful colors.
Yeah, very vivid and neon colors.
Yeah, really exciting, really exciting.
And he had a lovely slinky tail.
My favorite bit of him was the slinky tail.
Like, you know, those little mini silver fishes
that you can get that have rings of lessening cones.
And joined together at the top of the bottom,
and that's how the tail.
It was lovely.
It was lovely being able to walk along
and slink the tail behind you,
and the tail would come all the way around
and curve around the body.
It was lovely.
It was lovely to wear.
Well, I think we've had a fairly good,
and what can I say, lighthearted Rob
through well over 10 years of carnival contributions.
It's at this point that I say thank you very much,
Nikki, for all you've given to Cardiff Carnival.
And hereby give you the completely unbankable,
but nonetheless worthy title of carnival hero.
Nikki, thank you very much indeed.
Pleasure.